[docs] Dev tools plugins docs (#26031)
expo/expo: docs/pages/debugging/devtools-plugins.mdx

For example, a dev tools plugin that inspects [React Native Firebase](/guides/using-firebase/#using-react-native-firebase) will not work with Expo Go. React Native Firebase includes native code that is not part of Expo Go. To use the dev tools plugin and React Native Firebase, create a development build.

## Using a dev tools plugin

After installing the dev tools plugin and adding the connecting required code to your project, you can start the dev server up with `npx expo start`. Then press <kbd>shift</kbd> + <kbd>m</kbd> to open the list of available dev tools plugins. Select the plugin you want to use, and it will open in a new Chrome window.

> When starting the dev server with the Expo CLI, there is an option to press <kbd>?</kbd> to **show all commands**. This shows additional commands, including the shortcut to open **more tools**. Dev tools plugins can also be selected in this menu.

## Expo dev tools plugins

Expo provides some dev tools plugins for common debugging tasks. Follow the instructions below to start using them in your app.

### React Navigation

> Inspired by [`@react-navigation/devtools`](https://github.com/react-navigation/react-navigation/tree/4797ace/packages/devtools) and [`flipper-plugin-react-navigation`](https://github.com/react-navigation/react-navigation/tree/4797ace/packages/flipper-plugin-react-navigation), the React Navigation dev tools plugin allows seeing history of [React Navigation](https://reactnavigation.org/) actions and state. You can also rewind to previous points in your navigation history and send deep links to your app. Since Expo Router is built upon React Navigation, this plugin is fully compatible with [Expo Router](/router/introduction).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Inspired by [`@react-navigation/devtools`](https://github.com/react-navigation/react-navigation/tree/main/packages/devtools) and [`flipper-plugin-react-navigation`](https://github.com/react-navigation/react-navigation/tree/main/packages/flipper-plugin-react-navigation), the React Navigation dev tools plugin allows seeing history of [React Navigation](https://reactnavigation.org/) actions and state. You can also rewind to previous points in your navigation history and send deep links to your app. Since Expo Router is built upon React Navigation, this plugin is fully compatible with [Expo Router](/router/introduction).
```

Let's use the `main` branch links instead of commit reference.

## Adding a dev tools plugin to your project

Dev tools plugins are installed as packages in your project. A plugin will typically have a small amount of connecting code that you add to your app in order to enable two-way communication between your app and the plugin. This code will generally be invoked in your app's root component, especially if the plugin is inspecting a module that is available for the entire time your app is running. It is recommended that you wrap this code in a conditional that only runs in development mode, so that it is not included in production builds of your app:

```jsx
if (__DEV__) {
  // initialize your DevTools plugin here

> }

Reviewer 2: in the newer implementation, i'm lean toward to use the convention:

```ts
export let useReactNavigationDevTools: typeof import('./useReactNavigationDevTools').useReactNavigationDevTools;

// @ts-ignore process.env.NODE_ENV is defined by metro transform plugins
if (process.env.NODE_ENV !== 'production') {
  useReactNavigationDevTools = require('./useReactNavigationDevTools').useReactNavigationDevTools;
} else {
  useReactNavigationDevTools = () => {};
}
```

that should have better tree-shaking optimization.

```

In some cases, you may need to interact with a plugin directly. All plugins communicate through exports from `expo/devtools`, and you can send and listen to messages through `connectPluginFromDevToolsAsync`:

```jsx
import { connectPluginFromDevToolsAsync } from 'expo/devtools';

const client = await connectPluginFromDevToolsAsync();

client.sendMessage('ping', { from: 'app' });
client.addMessageListener('pong', (data) => {
  console.log('receiving pong', data);
});
```

### Compatibility with Expo Go and Development Builds

> Dev tools plugins themselves should only include JavaScript code, meaning they are generally compatible with both Expo Go and [Development Builds](development-builds/introduction/), and it should not require creating a new development build in order to add a dev tools plugin. If the underlying module that the plugin is inspecting is from a package that includes native code that is not already part of Expo Go, then you would need to create a new development build with that package included in order to use both the component and the plugin.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Dev tools plugins should only include JavaScript code. They are generally compatible with Expo Go and [Development builds](/development-builds/introduction/) and should not require creating a new development build to add the plugin. If a package's underlying module that the plugin inspects includes native code and is not part of Expo Go, create a new development build to use both the component and the plugin from that package.
```

- The last sentence didn't have a structure or a flow that I could understand
- We prefer Development builds
- Also, the link was broken

> For example, if you had a dev tools plugin that inspected [React Native Firebase](), that would not work with Expo Go, as React Native Firebase includes native code that is not already part of Expo Go. You would need to create a development build in order to use React Native Firebase, and then you could also use the dev tools plugin.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For example, a dev tools plugin that inspects [React Native Firebase](/guides/using-firebase/#using-react-native-firebase) will not work with Expo Go. React Native Firebase includes native code that is not part of Expo Go. To use the dev tools plugin and React Native Firebase, create a development build.
```

- Let's avoid using past tense
- Let's be concise
- Link was missing

## Using a dev tools plugin

> Once your dev tools plugin is installed and any required connecting code is added to your project. Start your dev server up with `npx expo start`, and then press <kbd>shift</kbd> + <kbd>m</kbd> to open the list of dev tools plugins. Select the plugin you want to use, and it will open in a new Chrome window.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
After installing the dev tools plugin and adding the connecting required code to your project, you can start the dev server up with `npx expo start`. Then press <kbd>shift</kbd> + <kbd>m</kbd> to open the list of available dev tools plugins. Select the plugin you want to use, and it will open in a new Chrome window.
```

> > When starting the a dev server with the Expo CLI, there is an option to press <kbd>?</kbd> to "show all commands". This will show additional commands, including the shortcut to open "more tools." Dev tools plugins can also be selected in this menu.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
> When starting the dev server with the Expo CLI, there is an option to press <kbd>?</kbd> to **show all commands**. This shows additional commands, including the shortcut to open **more tools**. Dev tools plugins can also be selected in this menu.
```

- Incorrect use of articles, let's stick to using one
- Let's use bold text to highlight something from our tools/settings instead of quotes for consistency

> ## Expo dev tools Plugins

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Expo dev tools plugins
```

> Expo provides some dev tools plugins for common debugging tasks. Follow the directions below to start using them in your app.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Expo provides some dev tools plugins for common debugging tasks. Follow the instructions below to start using them in your app.
```

### React Navigation

> Inspired by [@react-navigation/devtools](https://github.com/react-navigation/react-navigation/tree/4797ace/packages/devtools) and [flipper-plugin-react-navigation](https://github.com/react-navigation/react-navigation/tree/4797ace/packages/flipper-plugin-react-navigation), the React Navigation Dev Tools Plugin allows you to view a history of [React Navigation](https://reactnavigation.org/) actions and state. Rewind to previous points in your navigation history and send deep links to your app. Since Expo Router is built upon React Navigation, this plugin is fully-compatible with [Expo Router](/router/introduction).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Inspired by [`@react-navigation/devtools`](https://github.com/react-navigation/react-navigation/tree/4797ace/packages/devtools) and [`flipper-plugin-react-navigation`](https://github.com/react-navigation/react-navigation/tree/4797ace/packages/flipper-plugin-react-navigation), the React Navigation dev tools plugin allows seeing history of [React Navigation](https://reactnavigation.org/) actions and state. You can also rewind to previous points in your navigation history and send deep links to your app. Since Expo Router is built upon React Navigation, this plugin is fully compatible with [Expo Router](/router/introduction).
```

- Since this is a package, let's use inline code syntax highlights

> To use the plugin, first install the package:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To use the plugin, start by installing the package:
```

<Terminal cmd={['$ npx expo install @dev-plugins/react-navigation']} />

> Then pass navigation root to the plugin in your app's entry point when running in development mode:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Pass the navigation root to the plugin in your app's entry point when running in development mode:
```

<Tabs tabs={["Expo Router", "React Navigation"]}>
  <Tab>
  ```jsx app/_layout.js
  import { useEffect, useRef } from 'react';
  import { useRootNavigation, Slot } from 'expo-router';
  import { useReactNavigationDevTools } from '@dev-plugins/react-navigation';

  export default Layout() {

>     if (__DEV__) {
>       const navigationRef = useRef(null);
>       const rootNavigation = useRootNavigation();
> 
>       useReactNavigationDevTools(navigationRef);
> 
>       useEffect(() => {
>         navigationRef.current = rootNavigation;
>       }, [navigationRef.current]);
>     }

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    const navigationRef = useRef(null);
    const rootNavigation = useRootNavigation();

    useReactNavigationDevTools(navigationRef);

    useEffect(() => {
      navigationRef.current = rootNavigation;
    }, [navigationRef.current]);
```

the __DEV__ is not necessary

    return <Slot />;
  }

  ```
  </Tab>
  <Tab>
  ```jsx App.js
  import { NavigationContainer, useNavigationContainerRef } from '@react-navigation/native';
  import { useReactNavigationDevTools } from '@dev-plugins/react-navigation';

  export default function App() {
    const navigationRef = useNavigationContainerRef();

    useReactNavigationDevTools(navigationRef);

    return (
      <NavigationContainer ref={navigationRef}>{/* ... */}</NavigationContainer>
    );
  }
  ```
  </Tab>
</Tabs>

Run `npx expo start`, press <kbd>shift</kbd> + <kbd>m</kbd> to open the list of dev tools, and then select the React Navigation plugin. This will open the plugin's web interface, which will show your navigation history as you navigate through your app.

### Apollo Client

> Inspired by [react-native-apollo-devtools](https://github.com/razorpay/react-native-apollo-devtools), Apollo Client dev tools plugin lets you example cache, queries and mutations for the Apollo Client.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Inspired by [`react-native-apollo-devtools`](https://github.com/razorpay/react-native-apollo-devtools), the Apollo Client dev tools plugin allows you to example cache, queries, and mutations for the Apollo Client.
```

- What is "example cache"?

> To use the plugin, first install the package:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To use the plugin, start by installing the package:
```

<Terminal cmd={['$ npx expo install @dev-plugins/apollo-client']} />

> Then pass your client instance to the plugin in your app's root component, or wherever you wrap the rest of your app in the `ApolloProvider`:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Then pass your client instance to the plugin in your app's root component or where you wrap the rest of your app in the `ApolloProvider`:
```

```jsx App.js
import { ApolloProvider, ApolloClient, InMemoryCache } from '@apollo/client';
import { useApolloClientDevTools } from '@dev-plugins/apollo-client';

const client = new ApolloClient({
  uri: 'https://demo.test.com/',
  cache: new InMemoryCache(),
});

export default function App() {

>   if (__DEV__) {
>     useApolloClientDevTools(client);
>   }

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  useApolloClientDevTools(client);
```

the __DEV__ is not necessary

  return (
    <ApolloProvider>
      {/* ... */}
    </ApolloProvider>
  )
}
```

> Run `npx expo start`, press <kbd>shift</kbd> + <kbd>m</kbd> to open the list of dev tools, and then select the Apollo Client plugin. This will open the plugin's web interface, which will show your query history, cache, and mutations as your app performs Apollo Client operations.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In the terminal, run `npx expo start`, press <kbd>shift</kbd> + <kbd>m</kbd> to open the list of dev tools, and then select the Apollo Client plugin. This will open the plugin's web interface, showing your query history, cache, and mutations as your app performs Apollo Client operations.
```

### React Query

> Inspired by [react-query-native-devtools](https://github.com/bgaleotti/react-query-native-devtools), the React Query Dev Tools Plugin lets you explore [TanStack Query](https://tanstack.com/query/latest/)'s data and queries, cache status, and refetch and remove queries from the cache.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Inspired by [`react-query-native-devtools`](https://github.com/bgaleotti/react-query-native-devtools), the React Query dev tools plugin lets you explore data and queries, cache status, and refetch and remove queries from the cache from [TanStack Query](https://tanstack.com/query/latest/).
```

To use the plugin, first install the package:

<Terminal cmd={['$ npx expo install @dev-plugins/react-query']} />

> Then pass your client instance to the plugin in your app's root component, or wherever you wrap the rest of your app in the `QueryClientProvider`:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Then pass your client instance to the plugin in your app's root component or where you wrap the rest of your app in the `QueryClientProvider`:
```

```jsx App.js
import { QueryClient, QueryClientProvider } from '@tanstack/react-query';
import { useReactQueryDevTools } from '@dev-plugins/react-query';

const queryClient = new QueryClient({});

export default function App() {

>   if (__DEV__) {
>     useReactQueryDevTools(queryClient);
>   }

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  useReactQueryDevTools(queryClient);
```

the __DEV__ is not necessary

  return (
    <QueryClientProvider>
      {/* ... */}
    </QueryClientProvider>
  )
}
```

> Run `npx expo start`, press <kbd>shift</kbd> + <kbd>m</kbd> to open the list of dev tools, and then select the React Query plugin. This will open the plugin's web interface, displaying queries as they are used in your app.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In the terminal, run `npx expo start`, press <kbd>shift</kbd> + <kbd>m</kbd> to open the list of dev tools, and then select the React Query plugin. This will open the plugin's web interface, displaying queries as they are used in your app.
```

### TinyBase

The TinyBase Dev Tools Plugin connects the TinyBase Store Inspector to your app, allowing you to view and update the contents of your app's store.

To use the plugin, first install the package:

<Terminal cmd={['$ npx expo install @dev-plugins/tinybase']} />

Then pass your client instance to the plugin in your app's root component, or wherever you wrap the rest of your app in `Provider`:

```jsx App.js
import { createStore } from 'tinybase';
import { useValue, Provider } from 'tinybase/lib/ui-react';
import { useTinyBaseDevTools } from '@dev-plugins/tinybase';

const store = createStore().setValue('counter', 0);

export default function App() {

>   if (__DEV__) {
>     useTinyBaseDevTools(store);
>   }

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  useTinyBaseDevTools(store);
```

the __DEV__ is not necessary
